+++
title = "Project: Restoring a Roland Lucina AX-09 Keytar"
+++

Earlier this year I have bought and restored a used keytar and I thought I would write up
the experience for anyone thinking to take on a similar project.

<!-- more -->

This started with me watching videos of people playing cool riffs and electronic music on
keytars online and then wanting one. A keytar
([›wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keytar)) is a keyboard (the musical instrument)
that can be held like a Guitar, usually with a strap. They are not as prevalent as many
other instruments but there is some amount of variety since they became popular in the
1980s. Some models include a synthesizer while others function as a MIDI controller, some
are smaller and have mini-keys while others have full sized piano keys, the quality of the
[Aftertouch](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aftertouch) varies, etc.
I played the keyboard for some time when I was younger, certainly I never exceeded
beginner's level. So I wanted something pick up learning to play, full sized keys and
preferably usable as a MIDI controller with a learning software such as
[Synthesia](https://synthesiagame.com/). The price of most new keytars was above what I
was willing to spend though so I looked around for used ones for a while and eventually
found a Roland Lucina AX-09 that had a non-funtioning button, broken stereo output, and
had been adorned by its owner in the appropriate style of their [glam
rock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glam_rock) band. I was able to restore the
functionality of the broken button and the stereo output, decided to remove the gemstone
adornments, and gave the device a good cleaning inside and out. Here are a few pictures of
the process:

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0010_ax09_before_restoration.webp", alt="Keytar Before Restoration", width=610) }}

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0020_ax09_tapedcorner.webp", alt="Taped Corner", width=260) }}

The keytar arrived pretty much in the state described by the seller with all functions
working except stereo output and button '6' which selects the guitar voices not working,
the case in overall good condition, a piece of tape over a chipped-off corner and those
gemstone ornaments.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0030_ax09_opening.webp", alt="Opening the Keytar", width=610) }}

There are three cables to unplug to separate the two halves.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0040_ax09_tophalf.webp", alt="Keytar Top Half", width=610) }}

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0050_ax09_button_pcb.webp", alt="Button PCB", width=600) }}

The top half has the PCB with the faulty button 6.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0060_ax09_pcbdamage.webp", alt="PCB Damage", width=600) }}

[comment]: /images/keytar/0065_ax09_pcbdamage_ann.webp

Some corrosion around the switch pad (marked SW206) was visible. The outer carbon pads were
in fact not connected to the copper trace below.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0080_ax09_bottomhalf.webp", alt="Keytar Bottom Half", width=610) }}

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0070_ax09_brokenjack.webp", alt="Broken Audio Jack", width=300) }}

The bottom half holds the keyboard assembly (flipped on its top in the picture) and most
of the electronics. The audio jack for the right channel was visibly damaged which was
probably the reason there was only mono output through the 3.5mm headphone jack as well.

There was a lot of grime (and confetti) on the inside of the instrument, it had been
well-used on stage after all. So I set on to fully dismantle it for cleaning.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0090_ax09_bathtub.webp", alt="Cleaning the Shell", width=610) }}

Stripped off all electronics, the pieces of the shell went soaking in the bathtub.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0100_ax09_keyboardassembly.webp", alt="Keyboard Assembly", width=610) }}

The keys could be lifted off the keyboard assembly by removing the springs at the back.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0110_ax09_keybucket.webp", alt="Cleaning the Keys", width=300) }}

And so they went into this little bucket to soak in soap water as well.

After a while in soapy water I proceeded to clean the shell pieces and the keys using a
sponge, a toothbrush, and more detergent. This was the most laborious task of the project
as I wanted everything to be as new-looking as possible. Using some adhesive remover and a
knife, I removed the gemstone ornaments more or less cleanly.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0135_ax09_pcbcleaning.webp", alt="Cleaning the PCBs", width=500) }}

I looked for more signs of corrosion and old capacitors on the PCBs and cleaned _all of
them_ with contact cleaner and Q-tips.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0120_ax09_button_pcb_fix.webp", alt="Fixed Button PCB", width=610) }}

By scratching into the copper trace on the PCB with a screwdriver and soldering a strand
of copper wire over it, I _fixed_ the instrument selector button 6. *I would never want to
have to rely on this fix on stage*, proper board-repair techniques would be required here.
But this is only meant for myself to play at home so I'm fine with it 😁.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0125_ax09_replacement_jack.webp", alt="Replacement Audio Jack", width=590) }}
{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0130_ax09_replacement_jack_assembly.webp", alt="Transplanting Missing Pin in Replacement Audio Jack", width=610) }}

To find a replacement for the audio jack I had to browse the webs for a while. I ordered a
part that was advertised as a replacement for Roland 6.3mm mono phone jacks and looked
very similar. When I got int in my hands I found that it had one less leg than the
original. Luckily, it was constructed precisely the same way as the broken piece and I
could _transplant_ the metal piece with the additional leg from the broken part.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0140_ax09_jack_replaced.webp", alt="Replaced Audio Jack", width=610) }}

With the replacement jack installed and the keyboard assembly temporarily plugged in,
stereo output was working fine. Although I cannot say for sure the jack was the fault as
the faulty jack was causing no short and while I took the keytar apart a little metal
piece that looks very much like the tip of a 2.5mm TRS plug dropped out somewhere,
possibly out of the 2.5mm headphone jack... 🤔

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0160_ax09_screws.webp", alt="AX-09 Screws", width=400) }}

Starting to put things back together, I noticed that the two different sizes of screws
were ease to confuse.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0150_ax09_grease.webp", alt="Grease for Keyboard", width=610) }}

The keys used to be lubricated and dampened with some viscous white grease. Since the grease
became very dirty over time I chose to replace it. This grease out of a spray can was the
only grease for plastics the nearest hardware store had. The key action does not feel
entirely the same with it but I wanted to keep going and not spend more time looking for
something ideal.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0170_ax09_keyboard_reassembly.webp", alt="Re-Assembly of the Keyboard", width=610) }}

After putting the keys back in place, I put the springs back on using a screwdriver...

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0180_ax09_key_gaps.webp", alt="Gaps Between Keys", width=610) }}

... and realized that the gaps between the keys were uneven. I'm guessing that the c and f
keys and/or the e and b keys are not exactly the same shape.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0190_ax09_halves_assembled.webp", alt="Assembled Halves", width=610) }}

Anyways I proceeded to swap around some of those keys at whim until the gaps looked more
even. Above you can see the two re-assembled halves.

{{ resized_image(source="/images/keytar/0200_ax09_refurbished_keytar.webp", alt="Refurbished Keytar", width=610) }}

I am pretty happy with the result after putting it all back together! Although I was left
with one screw and one remaining screw hole that was too big for it, meaning I must have
forced one of the bigger screws into a smaller hole somewhere 😆.

In summary, buying a used Keytar can definitely save some money considering the prices
these things are sold at today in comparison to regular keyboards. The cost for additional
material for restoration of course depends a lot on the state of the used part. However, I
would recommend to buy new if you don't also enjoy these kinds of DIY projects as it does
take time. After spending almost two weekends on it I have developed a special connection
to my new music instrument though! 😊
